---
title: Assembling the genome sequence of the plastids and mitochondria of the white spruce (*Picea glauca*)
author: |
  Shaun D. Jackman 1, Anthony Raymond 1, Ben Vandervalk 1, Hamid Mohamadi 1,
  Rene Warren 1, Stephen Pleasance 1, Robin Coope 1, Macaire M. S. Yuen 2,
  Christopher Keeling 2, Carol Ritland 2, Jean Bousquet 3, Alvin Yanchuk 4,
  Kermit Ritland 2, John MacKay 3, Steven JM Jones 1, Joerg C Bohlmann 2 and
  Inanc Birol 1

  (1) BC Cancer Agency, Genome Sciences Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
  (2) University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
  (3) Univesite Laval, Quebec, QC, Canada,
  (4) British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Victoria, BC, Canada
date: 2014-01-03
---

The SMarTForests project has published a draft genome sequence of the
20 gigabase white spruce genome, seven times the size of the human
genome, sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq sequencing
platforms. Within this large dataset are sequence reads originating
from the organelle genomes. Whereas one copy of the diploid nuclear
genome is found in each cell, hundreds of organelles are present, and
thus hundreds of copies of the organelle genome sequence. This
abundance results in an overrepresentation of the organelle genome
sequence in the whole genome sequencing data. We can therefore
separate the sequencing reads that originate from the organelle
genomes from the nuclear genome sequence by identifying reads that are
highly abundant. Once the organelle reads are isolated, they can be
assembled de novo to produce the genome sequence of the mitochondria
and plastids.

Contigs of the draft white spruce genome that have unusually high
depth of coverage are identified and separated from the remainder of
the assembly. These high-depth contigs are composed of the organelle
genomes as well as high copy number repeats. The sequencing reads are
mapped to the entire draft white spruce genome, and reads that map to
these contigs with high depth of coverage are separated. These reads
are assembled using ABySS. The resulting contigs are aligned to the
Norway spruce (*Picea abies*) complete plastid genome (NC_021456) and
putative mitochondrial sequences using BWA-MEM to identify putative
white spruce mitochondrial and plastid sequences.
